graphs are a fascinating data structure
because not only are they practically
incredibly useful but they also unlock a
really large number of very difficult
and interesting math problems then
what's interesting about these problems
is that not only are they difficult but
they're easy to state so there's so many
neat problems you can talk about with
graphs where you can you can explain it
to somebody maybe in a minute as young
as like eight and the solution is
actually something maybe they can
understand but coming up with the answer
is often very tricky so some examples of
those problems well given a graph is
there a path between vertices SMT that's
a pretty simple one how about what is
the shortest path between vertices s and
T what about a cycle how do we tell if a
graph contains cycles but just give you
the graph object and we'll talk about
representation soon how would you know
is there a cycle or not now how about an
Euler tour this is a cycle that uses
every edge exactly one time how about a
Hamilton tour which is similar which is
not related to the hit musical haha okay
I couldn't resist that Jo it's just bad
leave it you could pretend I didn't say
it yeah so Hamilton tours is there a
cycle that uses every vertex exactly
once it's these two questions actually
they seem very similar but one of them
is insanely hard in the sense that
writing an algorithm that's efficient is
near impossible the other one turns out
to be fairly easy connectivity is the
graph fully connected that is is there a
path from any vertex to any other vertex
and for you I mean being a primate you
look at a graph and you kind of see you
could tell whether or not but for a
computer of course it's not so obvious
because there isn't that immediate you
know visual cortex thing going on so
with the connectivity this actually ends
up being a you know slightly more
challenging no not a very hard one by
connectivity is there some vertex that
if you destroy it
the graph is no longer connected so for
example can I find a subway station that
if I eliminate it there's two distinct
subways some central hub for example
another planarity this one's actually a
very interesting one mathematically so
it's can you take the graph and draw it
on a piece of paper such that no edges
are crossing so there are some graphs
such that if you lay out the vertices
just right there's no edges that cross
physically but there's some graphs that
actually physically come out
those are non planar graphs and this is
actually a pretty interesting problem
isomorphism this is perhaps the most
fascinating mathematically which is
given to graph so they actually the same
graph like maybe you just took the
vertices and move them around and this
has been a long-standing dispute in
mathematics whether or not an algorithm
for this has a certain runtime the
optimal algorithm and I'm not gonna talk
about it much on this level and so
what's interesting about graphs again is
that these problems are often easy to
state but they can be super hard and in
fact it's not obvious whether or not
they're easy they're hard they're
actually computationally intractable so
just look at a glance these different
problems they're all part of a different
complexity classes the word some are
easy some are hard some are intractable
and and sometimes it's hard to tell
that's a nice neat feature of graphs
right if you're somebody's a little
mathematically inclined there's so much
richness here and if you get involved
for example in CS theory one of the many
things that this class likes to give
hints of what CS is like the graphs are
one of the richest areas for theory so
some examples of graphs okay we saw
before the Paris metro and so with our
eyes we can already see a number of
traits the graphs
undirected and that's easy you can tell
instantly there's no algorithm for that
now you can tell it's connected and in
that case you would actually need to do
some more sophisticated work to see if
they're all connected
so as an algorithmic problem this is
non-trivial but pretty easy it is cyclic
right so if we look there are cycles
here it's not a tree we can go like for
example we can go here right that's a
cycle and it is vertex labeled in this
sense each vertex has a color so we can
think of that as a label and so telling
this connected or cyclic is actually a
computational problem the both of those
are actually pretty easy
how about Bart so the Bay Area Rapid
Transit System in the San Francisco Bay
Area question for you is it a tree in
other words are there cycles okay
well well notice there is actually one
little cycle here though it's kind of
tricky because these edges don't exist
at the same time of day so I guess I
would call it a cycle but maybe you
don't because you know these two edges
they never they never exist at the same
time at least under these rules another
example is this is a very old photo here
now for our site figure from December
2010 but in this case someone created a
neat little graph to show connections
between cities so in other words if I
see an edge from presumably this is
Honolulu to Seattle and so forth that is
the weight of the edge that is the
intensity of each edge is the number of
friends between cities and the in this
figure then a bright edge indicates a
larger number of friends between those
places it's also kind of interesting
because you can see that there some
places in the world that have lots of
people that at least as of 2010 did not
have many people on Facebook so it's
kind of cute you can see this as a neat
visualization another cool example is
this graph of scientific journals so in
this case each journal right so whenever
researchers published work they spread
it to the world by writing it up in a
document sending it out for review by
other experts in the field the other
experts decide ok that seems aboveboard
and then it goes into a journal which
sometimes they're open access sometimes
you have to pay to access them and so
this is an analysis of all the
scientific journals they could get their
hands on and so this node here
represents a single journal in this
particular case this is a journal about
the topic social and personality
psychology that is an interesting title
ok we have biochemistry we have
toxicology and so forth and so each of
these has a vertex label now what these
edge represent is if you are reading one
journal and you decide to click through
to another linked article because often
you want to cite other scientific work
if you do that click it was logged in
this case and so in this case what the
graph tells us is if there were a large
number of clicks between this journal in
this journal right this may be about so
this is an organic chemistry journal and
this is International Studies
interesting that there's a link here so
maybe this was about you know
manufacturing processes and how they
were spread from let's say China to
Korea who knows what and then maybe this
article
I mean maybe there was a link to some
articles about International Studies so
there were enough people clicking on
articles in this journal articles for
example about that topic I mentioned and
so then once that gets above some
threshold they decide to draw this link
and so we can see here I'm nice taxonomy
of all of science anyway and we can see
this cool arc that we have down here the
life sciences nicely in green but they
kind of arc into well sometimes biology
journals will talk about or say plant
agriculture might relate to biotech
which then goes to toxicology which
relates to biochemistry which then some
of those journals are related to
analytical chemistry to organic
chemistry to physical chemistry to
statistical physics up into material
science so this is nice you can see the
whole physics to biology sweep here we
see a bunch of humanities so we see
archeology Human Geography clustered
together I think there's a lot of really
neat richness with this figure and so
this again what could it be useful for
well it's nice because it gives you a
picture of the structure of human
endeavor
so again graphs are very versatile data
structure and you could imagine that
those other questions that we discussed
before about cycles and so forth they
could be interesting maybe maybe not
here we could see that pretty much the
world of journals is connected though to
be honest that's a little bit of an
artifact of the fact that these
thresholds were chosen probably
precisely so that it was just barely
connected that is suppose they decide
the number of clicks that's needed for a
connection is only one then I bet you
every single one of these notes will be
directly connected to every other last
example I here is something called
wordnet that's actually a really cool
idea we mentioned it briefly earlier in
a lecture about hypo names and hyper
names with inheritance but if we look
here each edge represents that one word
is a type of another thing so for
example variation is a type of change
changes the type of action actions are a
type of human activity which is
ultimately an event okay jumping or
leaping that notion of jumping is a type
of increase and increases a type of
modification and so forth so this is a
cool database that lets you explore all
of the different concepts in English and
I'll mention just briefly that some
words belong to multiple Kahn
ceps so for example we have here jump
and leap here we have jump so this looks
like jump and parachuting so this
concept is a type of descent and this
type of jumping is a type of increase
and if you want you can browse this now
this lecture is not about word net so
that stuff's not super important there's
that was kind of cool but this graph
right here you can think of each
directed edge as representing in is a
type of relationship and again trying to
demonstrate the versatility of grass